MINIMUM MONTHLY PAYMENTS DUE:
A.P.R. 22.65% FOR BEST RATE
24.65% FOR STANDARD RATE.
MINIMUM FINANCE CHARGE:
50 CENTS.
SEE CARDHOLDER AGREEMENT
FOR DETAILS.
OFFER ENDS SUNDAY.
THERE'S NOTHING
PHYSICALLY WRONG WITH YOU.
THEN WHY DO I FEEL SO AWFUL?
SO BLOATED
AND SLUGGISH?
NOTHING GIVES ME JOY ANYMORE--
NOT THE HOUSE, THE CAR,
THE CLOTHES, THE RAISE.
NOTHING!
DOCTOR, I'M FRIGHTENED.
WELL, DO SOMETHING!
CAN'T YOU GIVE ME A PILL?
THERE'S NO PILL
FOR WHAT'S WRONG WITH YOU.
I'M AFRAID
YOU'RE SUFFERING FROM...
AFFLUENZA.
OH, MY GOD!
WHY ME?
IS IT FATAL?
IT'S CATASTROPHIC.
IT'S THE NEW EPIDEMIC.
WELL, THERE IS A CURE,
ISN'T THERE?
POSSIBLY.
AFFLUENZA IS A MAJOR DISEASE;
THERE IS NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
AND MANY PEOPLE SUFFER FROM IT,
BUT VERY FEW PEOPLE ARE AWARE
THAT THAT'S WHAT
THEY'RE SUFFERING FROM.
GOTTA LISTEN TO ME, HONEY,
BETTER COUNT ALL YOUR MONEY
BETTER KNOW JUST
WHERE YOU STAND
IF YOU WANT TO BE MY DATE
WELL, YOU BETTER
GET IT STRAIGHT
I'M A BIG-TIME SHOPPING MAN
YEAH, I SHOP REAL FAST,
I BUY THINGS THAT DON'T LAST
I PAY FOR STUFF
THAT I COULD GET FOR FREE
AND I'LL DO IT TILL I DIE,
'CAUSE I FIGURED OUT
THAT LIFE IS JUST
ONE BIG SHOPPING SPREE
BABY, COME ON, THERE'S A WHOLE
LOTTA SHOPPIN' GOIN' ON
YEAH, LET'S GO TO THE MALL
COME ON, THERE'S A WHOLE LOT
OF SHOPPIN' GOIN' ON
GET THAT MONEY OUT
OF YOUR SAVINGS ACCOUNT
COME ON, THERE'S A WHOLE
LOTTA SHOPPIN' GOIN' ON.
WHOO!
( applause )
[Captioning sponsored
by PEW CHARITABLE TRUSTS]
HI, I'M SCOTT SIMON.
ARE YOU SPENDING MORE NOW
BUT ENJOYING IT LESS?
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
APPARENTLY ARE.
WE'RE FILLING OUR LIVES
WITH THINGS
AND THEN TELLING PUBLIC OPINION
POLLSTERS AND CLERGY
AND PSYCHIATRISTS AND FRIENDS
THAT WE FEEL EMPTY INSIDE.
NEVER BEFORE, IT SEEMS, HAS SO
MUCH MEANT SO LITTLE TO SO MANY.
Man:
THERE'S A UNIVERSAL FEELING
IN THIS NATION
THAT WE'VE BECOME
TOO MATERIALISTIC, TOO GREEDY
TOO SELFISH, TOO SELF-ABSORBED
AND THAT WE NEED TO BRING
BACK INTO BALANCE
THE ENDURING VALUES
THAT HAVE GUIDED
THIS COUNTRY OVER GENERATIONS.
Simon:
SOME CALL THE AFFLICTION
"AFFLUENZA"
UNTREATED, IT CAN CAUSE
PERMANENT DISCONTENT.
AFFLUENZA'S COSTS
AND CONSEQUENCES FOR US
FOR OUR FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS
AND THE EARTH ITSELF--
ARE IMMENSE,
THOUGH OFTEN CONCEALED.
WE HUMAN BEINGS,
ESPECIALLY IN THIS CENTURY
HAVE BEEN PRODUCING
AND CONSUMING
AT A RATE THAT FAR EXCEEDS
THE ABILITY OF THE PLANET
TO EITHER ABSORB OUR POLLUTION
OR REPLENISH THE STOCK.
IT'S GOING
TO HURT A BIT.
Simon:
AFFLUENZA CAN BE CURED
BUT THE VIRUS
IS VERY CONTAGIOUS.
( growling ):
BUY NOW, PAY LATER.
Simon:
AND IT'S BEEN SPREADING
FOR QUITE A WHILE.
Woman:
I WANT A CORVETTE
I WANT A PONTIAC, TOO.
Man:
LET'S GO ALL OUT
AND BUY A CADILLAC, TOO.
Woman:
I CAN HARDLY WAIT
FOR THIS DREAM TO COME TRUE.
Simon:
ARE YOU OLD ENOUGH
TO REMEMBER THE '50S
THAT GOLDEN AGE OF PROSPERITY
FOLLOWING THE SECOND WORLD WAR?
Announcer:
IT'S A GREAT LIFE, EH, BOB?
AND TOMORROW
WILL BE EVEN BETTER
FOR YOU AND FOR ALL THE PEOPLE.
Simon:
WE FELT RICHER THEN
THAN WE DO NOW.
A FAMOUS BOOK OF THE TIME CALLED
AMERICA "THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY."
A BOOK WHOSE TITLE
WOULD BE LAUGHABLE TODAY.
PEOPLE WOULD REJECT IT,
EVEN THOUGH WE HAVE
ACTUALLY, IN TERMS OF GROSS
NATIONAL PRODUCT AND SO FORTH
MORE THAN TWICE AS MUCH.
EVERYBODY'S HOME HAS GOT
TWICE AS MUCH STUFF IN IT.
Simon:
BACK IN 1958
ONLY FOUR PERCENT OF
AMERICAN HOMES HAD DISHWASHERS.
NOW MORE THAN HALF DO.
LESS THAN ONE PERCENT
HAD COLOR TELEVISIONS.
NOW IT'S 97%.
AND THERE WERE NO MICROWAVES,
V.C.R.s OR PERSONAL COMPUTERS.
Man:
UH... FOUR-CAR GARAGE?
IT'S PROBABLY
BECAUSE OF STORAGE.
YOU NEVER HAVE
ENOUGH STORAGE
AND SO, YOU KNOW,
YOU NEVER HAVE ENOUGH GARAGES.
Simon:
NEVER ENOUGH.
SO MUCH STUFF, SO LITTLE SPACE
EVEN THOUGH
THE AVERAGE NEW HOUSE
HAS GROWN LARGER EVERY DECADE.
NOW MANY NEW HOMES
HAVE THREE-CAR GARAGES--
NEARLY 900 SQUARE FEET
OF GARAGE SPACE ALONE
WHICH IS ALMOST THE SIZE OF
AN ENTIRE HOME IN THE '50s.
OH, DARLING,
IT'S GOING TO BE
JUST PERFECT!
Announcer:
YOU ARE ABOUT TO ENTER
A BEAUTIFUL, EXCITING,
WONDERFUL NEW WORLD--
THE WORLD OF 1960...
A WONDERFUL NEW WORLD OF FORDS.
Simon:
IN THAT GILDED NEW WORLD
HARDLY ANY NEW CARS
HAD AIR CONDITIONING.
TODAY, MORE THAN 90% DO.
ECONOMY CARS NOW OFFER
MORE FEATURES
THAN LUXURY CARS DID THEN.
Woman:
COLOR IS IMPORTANT.
I DON'T WORRY TOO MUCH
ABOUT GAS MILEAGE AT ALL.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING
THAT I LOOK AT.
A LOT OF MONEY.
YES, IT IS.
Simon:
TODAY'S HOTTEST-SELLING CARS
ARE EXPENSIVE, GAS-HUNGRY
SPORT UTILITY VEHICLES.
FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE,
IT'S A STATUS SYMBOL.
SO THEY'RE WILLING TO SPEND THE
30 TO 40-ODD THOUSAND DOLLARS
TO DRIVE ONE OF THESE VEHICLES.
Announcer:
YES, FUN TO SEE
FUN TO DRIVE
FUN TO BUY--
THE NEW CHEVROLET.
Simon:
JUST AS THEY DID IN THE '50s
NEW CARS STILL HELP US
KEEP UP WITH THE JONESES.
BUT THESE DAYS, WE FIND IT
MORE APPEALING TO FLY.
WE FLY 25 TIMES
AS MUCH AS WE DID THEN.
SOMETIMES WE FLY JUST TO SHOP.
Woman:
DON'T JUST STAND THERE--
GIVE ME YOUR CREDIT CARD!
WELL, THOSE EAST COAST STORES
REALLY KNOCK ME OUT
THEY LEAVE
THE WEST BEHIND...
Simon:
POTOMAC MILLS ATTRACTS
MORE VISITORS
THAN ANY OTHER SITE IN VIRGINIA.
THIS SHOPPING MALL IS SUCH
A POPULAR TOURIST DESTINATION
AIRLINES OFFER EXCURSION FLIGHTS
HERE FROM DISTANT CITIES.
WHERE ARE
YOU FROM?
DALLAS AREA.
Simon:
POTOMAC MILLS IS
A DISCOUNT SUPERMALL
DIVIDED INTO WHAT
ARE EUPHEMISTICALLY
CALLED "NEIGHBORHOODS."
SHOPPING MALLS HAVE BECOME
THE CENTERS OF MANY COMMUNITIES.
CHILDREN, AS WELL AS ADULTS,
SEE A SHOPPING CENTER
AS JUST THE NATURAL DESTINATION
TO FILL A BORED LIFE.
Simon:
70% OF US VISIT MALLS EACH WEEK
MORE THAN ATTEND
CHURCHES OR SYNAGOGUES.
ON AVERAGE, WE SHOP
SIX HOURS A WEEK
AND SPEND ONLY 40 MINUTES
PLAYING WITH OUR CHILDREN.
YOU SHOP,
YOU SPEND MONEY--
WHAT ELSE MATTERS?
Announcer:
IT'S A HAPPY-GO-SPENDING WORLD
REFLECTED IN THE WINDOWS OF
THE SUBURBAN SHOPPING CENTERS
WHERE THEY GO TO BUY.
Simon:
BY 1987
AMERICA HAD MORE SHOPPING MALLS
THAN HIGH SCHOOLS.
FEW MALL SHOPPERS COME
WITH ANY INTENTION
OF PURCHASING
A PARTICULAR PRODUCT.
MOST BUY LARGELY ON IMPULSE.
Woman:
OOH, PARTY SNACKS!
Simon:
AS THIS OLD SALES TRAINING FILM
SUGGESTS, THAT'S NO ACCIDENT
Man:
AND HERE'S THAT MOST IMPORTANT
STORE DECISION OF ALL:
THE IMPULSE PURCHASE.
TO MAKE
PEOPLE
HUNGRY
FOR AS MUCH
AS POSSIBLE--
HUNGRY ENOUGH
TO BUY A LOT MORE
THAN THEY
PLANNED TO.
Woman:
Buy the half-price dress.
The cocktail party will come.
Have you been
to Potomac Mills this month?
Simon:
IT WAS AN INGRATIATINGLY
CLEVER AD CAMPAIGN
THAT FIRST LURED ME
TO POTOMAC MILLS MALL.
Shopping is therapy.
Listen to that little voice
in your head.
Shop... shop... shop... shop...
You can buy happiness--
just don't pay retail for it.
Simon:
BUT EVEN WHOLESALE
THE PRICE IS HIGHER THAN MOST
OF US SEEM ABLE TO AFFORD.
IN FACT
THE PERCENTAGE OF AMERICANS
CALLING THEMSELVES "VERY HAPPY"
REACHED ITS HIGHEST POINT
BACK IN 1957.
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL REALITY
OF PEOPLE IS
THAT ALMOST THEIR ENTIRE
ORIENTATION TO HOW WE ARE DOING
IS BASED ON COMPARISON.
THAT'S WHY
AS AN ENTIRE SOCIETY GROWS
PEOPLE DON'T FEEL ANY BETTER
BECAUSE THEY'RE STILL
IN THE SAME RELATIVE POSITION.
THERE'S THIS SENSE OF BEING
ON AN ENDLESS TREADMILL
AND OF NEVER GETTING
TO WHERE YOU THOUGHT
YOU WERE GOING TO GET.
Simon:
STILL, WE KEEP ON INCREASING
OUR CONSUMPTION
PARTLY BY SAVING LESS
AND WORKING MORE.
IN OUR RESEARCH, WE HEAR
THE SAME REFRAIN ALL THE TIME:
"I HAVE NO LIFE.
"I GET UP IN THE MORNING
"DAY CARE, ELDER CARE...
"A 20- TO 40- MINUTE
COMMUTE TO WORK.
"I HAVE TO WORK LATE.
"I GET HOME AT NIGHT.
"THERE'S LAUNDRY, BILLS TO PAY
"JAM SOMETHING
INTO THE MICROWAVE OVEN.
"I'M EXHAUSTED,
GO TO SLEEP, WAKE UP
AND THE ROUTINE BEGINS
THE NEXT DAY ALL OVER AGAIN."
THIS IS WHAT LIFE
HAS BECOME IN AMERICA.
WOULD JESUS BE
AGENDA-DRIVEN?
WOULD HE CARRY
A BEEPER?
CAN YOU IMAGINE HIM
GETTING BEEPED OUT
OF THE LAST SUPPER?
Simon:
RICHARD SWENSON, M.D.
HE COULD BE CALLED
AN "AFFLUENZA EPIDEMIOLOGIST."
Swenson:
IF YOU LOOK AT THE COUNTRIES
THAT HAVE THE MOST PROSPERITY
THEY ARE THE SAME COUNTRIES
THAT HAVE THE MOST STRESS.
Simon:
DR. SWENSON IS CONVINCED
THAT MUCH OF THE PAIN
HIS PATIENTS SUFFER
IS A RESULT OF WHAT HE CALLS
"POSSESSION OVERLOAD."
IT COULD BE PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS:
YOU MIGHT HAVE HEADACHES
LOW BACK PAIN, HYPERACIDITY,
PALPITATIONS IN THE HEART
UNEXPLAINED ACHES AND PAINS.
IT COULD BE EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS.
I MEAN, IT COULD
BE LIKE DEPRESSION
OR IT COULD BE
ANXIETY, SLEEPLESSNESS.
YOU FIND THAT YOUR LIFE
IS BEING TAKEN UP
BY MAINTAINING AND CARING
FOR THINGS INSTEAD OF PEOPLE:
"EVERYTHING I OWN OWNS ME."
WE'VE HAD A LOT
OF SICKNESS THIS YEAR--
INCREDIBLE AMOUNT
OF SICKNESS.
Simon:
DR. SWENSON SAYS
AMERICANS IN EPIDEMIC NUMBERS
HAVE BEEN PUSHED BEYOND
THEIR EMOTIONAL, PHYSICAL
AND FINANCIAL LIMITS, AS
THEY'VE CHASED A DREAM FOR MORE.
THEY HAVE EXHAUSTION AND THEIR
RELATIONSHIPS ARE VAPORIZING.
THEY'RE SURROUNDED
BY ALL KINDS OF FUN TOYS
BUT THE MEANING HAS GONE.
THE SECRET TO A GOOD
RELATIONSHIP CAN BE FOUND
IN NEW STRAWBERRY-KIWI JELL-O.
NEW IMPROVED TRIDENT.
NEW GAME BOY!
GIANT SLICES.
DO YOU MISS
THE FURNITURE YOU LOVE?
THE STUFF DREAMS ARE MADE OF.
Simon:
BY THE AGE OF 20
THE AVERAGE AMERICAN HAS SEEN
A MILLION COMMERCIAL MESSAGES.
A.P.R. 22.65% FOR BEST...
Woman:
ADS ARE EVERYWHERE.
IF YOU GET THE FEELING
THAT THERE'S A LOT MORE
ADVERTISING AROUND
THAN THERE WAS WHEN YOU WERE A
KID, IT'S NOT YOUR IMAGINATION.
Simon:
ADVERTISING ACCOUNTS
FOR TWO-THIRDS OF THE SPACE
IN OUR NEWSPAPERS,
AND 40% OF OUR MAIL.
AMERICA SPENDS A BILLION DOLLARS
A YEAR ON BILLBOARDS ALONE.
THE EXTREME IS THE BILLBOARD
THAT WAS PROPOSED FOR OUTER
SPACE THAT WOULD PROJECT LOGOS
THAT WOULD LOOK
ABOUT THE SIZE OF THE MOON
VISIBLE TO PRACTICALLY
EVERYBODY ON EARTH.
You've got a big future
ahead of you, kid.
You'll be asked
to endorse products.
Simon:
ON AVERAGE, EACH OF US WILL
SPEND ONE FULL YEAR OF OUR LIVES
WATCHING TV COMMERCIALS.
Mazur:
ADVERTISING ENCOURAGES US
TO MEET NONMATERIAL NEEDS
THROUGH MATERIAL ENDS.
IT TELLS US TO BUY THEIR PRODUCT
BECAUSE WE'LL BE LOVED
WE'LL BE ACCEPTED,
AND ALSO IT TELLS US
THAT WE ARE NOT LOVABLE
AND ACCEPTABLE
WITHOUT BUYING THEIR PRODUCT.
AND THE BOTTOM LINE IS
THAT IT HELPS TURN
CITIZENS INTO CONSUMERS.
Man ( over speaker ):
Attention, mall shoppers:
There is a clearance
at the shoe store.
Simon:
THE PROCESS BEGINS IN CHILDHOOD.
There is a sale
at the bookstore.
THIS NEW GAME HELPS WHET
CHILDREN'S APPETITES
FOR SHOPPING.
There is a clearance
at the kitchen store.
Simon:
THE WINNER IS THE ONE
WHO BUYS THE MOST STUFF
AND GETS BACK
TO THE PARKING LOT FIRST.
SAVING ISN'T PART
OF THE STRATEGY.
Harwood:
60% OF ALL AMERICANS SAY
THAT OUR CHILDREN ARE
NOT JUST MATERIALISTIC;
THEY'RE VERY MATERIALISTIC.
Simon:
THAT'S ACTUALLY GOOD NEWS
TO SOME PEOPLE.
CHILDREN ARE THE FASTEST-GROWING
SEGMENT OF THE CONSUMER MARKET.
AND MANY MAJOR CORPORATIONS
ARE FINDING
THAT THE CONSUMER LIFESTYLE
STARTS YOUNGER AND YOUNGER.
AND IF YOU WAIT TO TALK TO
A PERSON ABOUT YOUR PRODUCT
TILL THEY'RE 18 YEARS OF AGE,
YOU PROBABLY WON'T CAPTURE THEM.
Simon:
OBVIOUSLY, SOMEBODY OUT THERE
IS AFRAID THE YOUNGSTERS
MIGHT ESCAPE.
FROM 1980 TO 1995, THE AMOUNT
TARGETED TO REACH THEM
ROSE FROM $100 MILLION
TO $1 BILLION A YEAR.
IT'S PAYING OFF.
Simon:
SO, WHAT'D YOU GET?
MAY WE ASK?
I GOT SOME
DONNA KARAN,
SOME GAP JEANS.
I GOT A GAP
SWEATER.
I'M ON MY WAY
TO GET A JACKET
FROM AMERICAN EAGLE.
I'M ABOUT TO GET SOME SHOES
AND I GOT ME
THIS DONNA KARAN JACKET.
I THINK THAT'S GOOD.
THAT'LL GET
THE MESSAGE ACROSS.
Simon:
JENNIFER GAILUS
AND OLIVIA MARTIN WORRY
THAT TODAY, TEENAGERS
SEEK SELF-ESTEEM
IN CLOTHES AND CARS
AND ARE OFTEN LEFT WITHOUT
A GENUINE SENSE OF IDENTITY.
WHILE THEY WERE HIGH SCHOOL
SENIORS IN REDMOND, WASHINGTON
JENNIE AND OLIVIA WROTE A PLAY
CALLED "BARBIE GET REAL."
HEY, YOU'RE WEARING
NEW EYE SHADOW AREN'T YOU?
IT LOOKS GREAT.
THANKS-- SO, WHAT ARE
OUR PLANS FOR TODAY?
WELL, FIRST,
I THOUGHT WE COULD
GO CRUISING AROUND
IN YOUR PINK CORVETTE
AND THEN WE COULD
HIT THE MALL.
GOOD IDEA!
MATT, SAY THAT LIKE
IT'S THE BEST IDEA
YOU'VE EVER HAD.
BE REALLY EXCITED--
"LET'S GO CRUISING."
Simon:
JENNIE AND OLIVIA PLAY
DAZZLE AND NEON, BARBIE DOLLS
WHOSE SHALLOW LIVES REVOLVE
AROUND APPEARANCES AND SHOPPING.
MIDWAY THROUGH THE PLAY
NEON HAS SECOND THOUGHTS
ABOUT HER LIFE.
WHAT IS WRONG WITH ME?
I HAVE EVERYTHING:
THE RIGHT LOOK, THE RIGHT
ATTITUDE, THE RIGHT FRIENDS
BUT I STILL FEEL SO... EMPTY.
NEON IS FINALLY
MAKING HER
TRANSFORMATION,
HER CHANGE
SO DON'T LET IT
AFFECT YOUR SMILE
BUT STILL SHOW
A LOT OF ANGER
THAT SHE'S MADE
THIS OUTRAGEOUS
CHANGE IN HER LIFE
YOU KNOW, AND
IT'S HURTING YOU.
IT WAS NEVER ABOUT
HER AS A PERSON;
IT WAS ABOUT IMAGE,
BEING SEEN TOGETHER.
SOMETHING HAPPENED
TO ME TODAY.
I'VE BEEN
FEELING SO ALONE
AND I DON'T
FEEL COMFORTABLE.
ISN'T THERE
A SHOE SALE NEXT WEEK?
WHY ARE YOU SO AFRAID TO HAVE
A REAL CONVERSATION WITH ME?
DON'T YOU WANT TO KNOW MORE
ABOUT ME AND WHO I REALLY AM?
I KNOW WHO YOU ARE.
YOU'RE NEON BARBIE,
THAT'S ALL I NEED TO KNOW.
THERE'S MORE TO ME
THAN WHERE I GO
WHO I'M WITH
AND MY ACCESSORIES.
AT LEAST I WISH THERE WAS.
THERE IS MORE
TO YOU THAN THAT:
YOU'RE BEAUTIFUL, TOO,
YOU DRIVE A GREAT CAR
YOU LIVE IN
A BEAUTIFUL DREAM HOUSE
COMPLETE WITH YOUR
BARBIE BUBBLING SPA
AND YOU'RE DATING ME.
WHAT ELSE
IS THERE?
I'M HOLLOW INSIDE!
NEON, GET AHOLD
OF YOURSELF.
THERE ARE PEOPLE HERE.
SO, HOW WAS YOUR DATE?
Simon:
OLIVIA AND JENNIE
BEGAN TO QUESTION
THE AMERICAN CONSUMER WAY OF
LIFE AFTER A TRIP TO MEXICO.
JUST THE WAY THEY LIVE
DOWN THERE IS SO HARSH.
THEY BARELY
HAVE ENOUGH FOOD,
ENOUGH CLOTHES,
BUT THEY WERE SO GIVING.
AND LOVING AND HAPPY PEOPLE
DESPITE WHAT THEY HAD.
YOU DON'T SEE THAT
VERY MANY PLACES IN AMERICA.
THE KIDS IN OUR HIGH SCHOOL TAKE
EVERYTHING FOR GRANTED.
THEY THINK THAT THEY DESERVE IT.
THEY THINK THAT SOMEHOW
THEY'VE EARNED IT
AND THE WORLD OWES IT TO THEM.
AND THEY'LL JUST TAKE,
THEY WON'T GIVE ANYTHING BACK.
OUR SOCIETY IS JUST GOING
TO CRUMBLE IF WE DON'T HAVE...
PEOPLE THAT GIVE.
Simon:
AFTER PERFORMING "BARBIE GET REAL"
JENNIE AND OLIVIA GAVE
ALL THE MONEY THEY MADE
TO HABITAT FOR HUMANITY, WHICH
BUILDS HOUSING FOR THE POOR.
THEY WON A NATIONAL AWARD
FOR THEIR PLAY
BUT IN THE MARKETPLACE OF IDEAS,
THEY FACE STIFF COMPETITION.
Man:
KIDS LOVE ADVERTISING;
IT'S A GIFT,
IT'S SOMETHING THEY WANT.
THERE'S SOMETHING TO BE SAID
ABOUT BEING THERE FIRST
AND ABOUT BRANDING CHILDREN
AND OWNING THEM IN THAT WAY.
Simon:
IT'S CALLED "KID POWER"
BUT IT'S ABOUT
SELLING THINGS TO KIDS.
IN BOYS' ADVERTISING, IT IS
AN AGGRESSIVE PLAY PATTERN.
Simon:
AT CONFERENCES LIKE THIS,
MARKETERS DISCUSS
THE LATEST STRATEGIES
FOR REACHING CHILDREN.
AND ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR
IN PURSUIT OF A PRODUCT...
IS A GOOD THING.
Simon:
EXPERTS HAVE LEARNED A LITTLE
SINCE THE EARLY DAYS
OF MARKETING RESEARCH.
Announcer:
SOCIOLOGISTS, PSYCHOLOGISTS
AND STUDENTS OF BEHAVIORISM
FIND IN TODAY'S TEENAGER
A STIMULATING AND ALMOST
LIMITLESS FIELD OF STUDY
BUT ONE IN WHICH THEY ARE LOST
WITHOUT EXPERT GUIDANCE.
WE ARE ENDEAVORING TO EVALUATE
THE TEENAGE AMERICAN GIRL
IN TERMS OF HER
LIKES AND DISLIKES.
WHAT ARE
TEENAGE CLOTHES?
WHAT ARE YOUR GROUP'S
SOCIAL HABITS?
OVER THE COURSE
OF THE PAST TEN OR 15 YEARS
THERE HAS BEEN A GREAT BOOM
IN KIDS' RESEARCH
AND KIDS' MARKETING.
WE'RE GOING INTO STORE AISLES
AND WATCHING THEM SHOP
WITH THEIR PARENTS.
WE'RE GOING INTO
THEIR HOMES AND KITCHENS
SITTING IN THEIR BEDROOMS
TO SEE HOW
THEY DECORATE THEIR ROOMS
AND WE'RE GIVING THEM
THE OPPORTUNITY
TO BE THE EXPERTS
AND TELL US HOW THEY FEEL.
Announcer:
So, kids, get it right now!
Ask your parents
to use their credit cards
and call 1-800-BUY MORE...
I LOVE YOU, DAD.
CAN I HAVE
THIS TOY?
NO!
OH, JUST A SECOND.
MOM, CAN I GET
THIS TOY I
SAW ON TV?
GABE, WE CAN'T HAVE
EVERYTHING WE WANT.
YOU JUST DON'T WANT
ME TO BE HAPPY.
( in deep voice ):
MY NAME'S MR. SMITH.
THAT'S RIGHT, MR. SMITH;
IT'S 4851...
( father clearing
throat )
YOU CAN'T STOP ME.
THERE'S ALWAYS GRANDMA.
Announcer:
Call in and win!
Simon:
ADS HAVE ALWAYS ACCOMPANIED
CHILDREN'S PROGRAMS
BUT TODAY'S MARKETING STRATEGIES
ARE NOT LIMITED TO TELEVISION.
Man:
CHILDREN IN THIS SOCIETY ARE
A CASH CROP TO BE HARVESTED.
Simon:
ALEX MOLNAR IS THE AUTHOR
OF "FIVING KIDS THE BUSINESS"
A STUDY OF THE COMMERCIAL
PENETRATION OF AMERICAN SCHOOLS.
MARKETERS ARE ATTEMPTING
TO EXPLOIT THIS MARKET
VERY AGGRESSIVELY
BECAUSE SCHOOLS REPRESENT
ONE OF THE FEW RELATIVELY
AD-FREE ENVIRONMENTS
LEFT IN OUR CULTURE.
PARENTS WOULD BE SHOCKED IF
THEY SAW SOME OF THE MATERIALS
THAT ARE SENT TO SCHOOLS
ALLEGEDLY TO HELP
THEIR CHILDREN LEARN.
THEY ARE REALLY
CORPORATE COME-ONS.
Simon:
SCHOOLCHILDREN DISCUSS
GOOD AND BAD HAIR DAYS
WITH MATERIALS
PROVIDED BY REVLON.
THEY STUDY GEOTHERMAL ENERGY
BY EATING GUSHERS FRUIT SNACKS.
IT IS LAUGHABLE ON ITS FACE
THAT CORPORATE EXECUTIVES
WHO GO AROUND THUMPING THE TUB
FOR WORLD-CLASS
ACADEMIC STANDARDS
SIGN OFF ON PROGRAMS
THAT WOULD SERIOUSLY PROPOSE
THAT CHILDREN SHOULD LEARN
THE HISTORY OF TOOTSIE ROLLS.
Reporter:
Kansas governor Bill Graves
will appoint someone
to the vacancy
maybe as early as next week.
Simon:
IN THOUSANDS
OF AMERICAN SCHOOLS
STUDENTS MUST WATCH CHANNEL 1,
A DAILY NEWS PROGRAM.
And we'll have more
Channel 1 News in a minute.
Simon:
ALONG WITH THE NEWS
COMES COMMERCIALS.
COMPANIES PAY UP TO $200,000
TO PLACE A SINGLE AD
ON CHANNEL 1
BECAUSE THEY'RE PROMISED
A CAPTIVE AUDIENCE
OF MILLIONS OF CHILDREN.
NOW, COMMERCIALS ARE ENTERING
AMERICA'S SCHOOLS IN OTHER WAYS.
Kid:
YOU'RE NOT ON OUR BUS!
Simon:
AT NORTH JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL,
THEY CALL THIS THE 7-UP BUS.
IT'S ONE OF SEVERAL
IN THE CITY OF COLORADO SPRINGS
WHICH HAVE ADS PAINTED
BOLDLY ON THEIR SIDES.
NO ONE ELSE EVER PUT ADS
ON THEIR SCHOOL BUSES.
WE'RE THE FIRST ONES TO DO IT.
Simon:
COLORADO SPRINGS IS A
PROSPEROUS, RAPIDLY GROWING CITY
BUT FOR YEARS, THE SCHOOLS HERE
HAVE BEEN VICTIMS OF AFFLUENZA.
Burnley:
PEOPLE TEND TO SAY,
"I'LL BUY A BOAT
INSTEAD OF GIVING MONEY
TO THE SCHOOLS."
A SCHOOL LEVY HAS NOT PASSED
HERE FOR CAPITAL SINCE 1972
AND FOR OPERATIONS SINCE 1969.
Simon:
SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT KENNETH
BURNLEY TURNED TO ADVERTISERS
TO INCREASE REVENUES.
AT WASSON HIGH SCHOOL, MOST OF
THE ADS ARE FOR THE SNACK FOODS
THAT STUDENTS ARE WARNED AGAINST
IN THEIR HEALTH CLASSES.
Man:
WE ARE ALLOWING THINGS
TO CREEP IN ONE BY ONE
THAT DISTRACT FROM LEARNING.
I THINK THERE IS A GREAT DEAL
MORE EMPHASIS BY STUDENTS
ON MATERIALISM.
I'M AFRAID THE WAY
OUR NATION IS GOING
WE ARE BECOMING PREOCCUPIED
WITH MATERIAL THINGS
AT THE EXPENSE OF OUR CHILDREN.
Galambos:
DO YOU FEEL
IF YOU'RE NOT WEARING
THE LATEST, THE BEST
THAT WOULD HURT
YOUR SELF-ESTEEM?
I DO.
Student:
IF YOU WEAR
SOMETHING GENERIC
YOU FEEL LIKE EVERYBODY'S
LOOKING AT YOU.
YOU NOTICE EVERYBODY
ELSE WEARING NIKE.
SO IT IS
A BIG DEAL.
All:
YES!
Simon:
OF COURSE MANY YOUNG AMERICANS
ARE ADOPTING CONSUMERISM
AS THEIR CREDO--
SO MANY OF THE ADULTS THEY SEE
ARE ALREADY IN
ABOVE THEIR HEADS.
Man:
THE WEDDING WAS SO GOOD;
WE ALMOST HAVE IT PAID OFF.
Woman:
AND THAT'S WHERE THE WHOLE BALL
STARTED ROLLING.
WE STARTED OUT THINKING
WE COULD FINANCE THE WORLD
AND WE TRIED,
BUT IT DIDN'T WORK.
Simon:
THE STORY OF THE ADAMS FAMILY
OF COLORADO SPRINGS
IS ONE THAT'S BECOME ALL TOO
FAMILIAR THROUGHOUT AMERICA.
Keaton:
18, I GOT A MERVYN'S CREDIT CARD
AND WITH THAT I MANAGED
TO GET MY VISA CARD
AND THEN CINDY MANAGED
TO GET HER VISA CARD
AND WE ENDED UP WITH LOTS
OF VISA CARDS TO BEGIN WITH.
Simon:
KEATON AND CINDY ADAMS
MARRIED IN 1990
AND SOON BEGAN BUYING
LOTS OF THINGS FOR THEIR HOME
ALL ON CREDIT.
Cindy:
FURNITURE, COUCHES, LOVESEAT
END TABLE, COFFEE TABLES,
ENTERTAINMENT CENTER.
Keaton:
WHAT'S ANOTHER $25 A MONTH?
THAT'S WHAT YOU THINK.
THEN WE FOUND OURSELVES MAKING
MINIMUM PAYMENTS EVERYWHERE.
TO THE POINT
WHERE WE COULDN'T.
AND THEN WHEN WE STARTED
TO GET TWO MONTHS BEHIND
THREE MONTHS BEHIND
THE ARGUMENTS ENSUED,
WE STARTED FIGHTING.
Simon:
THEY WERE $20,000 IN DEBT.
Keaton:
WE WERE SCREAMING "DIVORCE."
FINALLY WE JUST ENDED UP
REACHING A BREAKING POINT.
Keaton:
IT'S THE CAR.
SO WHAT DID THEY SAY?
COULD BE 600.
Simon:
IN 90% OF DIVORCE CASES
ARGUMENTS ABOUT MONEY
PLAY A PROMINENT ROLE.
KEATON AND CINDY
DIDN'T GET DIVORCED;
THEY GOT HELP WHEN A DEBT
COLLECTOR REFERRED THEM
TO CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING.
SEE IF SOMETHING'S SET UP
TO REPAY THIS DEBT.
THE CLIENTS HAD APPARENTLY
FINANCED SOME MEDICAL BILLS.
COULD YOU HAVE HIM CALL
CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING?
Simon:
THE PHONES ARE BUSY
AT CONSUMER CREDIT
COUNSELING SERVICE
AN INTERNATIONAL NETWORK
WITH HUNDREDS OF OFFICES
THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATES.
Woman:
WHEN A PERSON COMES
TO CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING
THE FIRST THING WE DO
IS CUT UP THE CREDIT CARDS.
THAT WHOLE AVAILABILITY
AND EASE OF USE OF CREDIT
MAKES IT REAL HARD FOR PEOPLE
TO REMEMBER THEY'RE
DEALING WITH REAL MONEY.
Simon:
AMERICANS POSSESS MORE
THAN A BILLION CREDIT CARDS.
FEWER THAN A THIRD OF US PAY OFF
OUR BALANCES EACH MONTH.
CREDIT CARD DEBT
TRIPLED IN THE 1980s.
NOT INCLUDING REAL ESTATE
AND MORTGAGES
WE'RE CARRYING OVER
A TRILLION DOLLARS IN DEBT.
Simon:
IN 1996, MORE THAN
A MILLION AMERICANS
DECLARED PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY--
MORE THAN GRADUATED
FROM COLLEGE.
Announcer:
DO YOU HAVE MONEY JITTERS?
ASK THE OBLIGING BANK OF
AMERICA
FOR A JAR OF SOOTHING
INSTANT MONEY--
M-O-N-E-Y IN THE FORM OF
A CONVENIENT PERSONAL LOAN.
Simon:
WHEN THIS COMMERCIAL WAS MADE,
AMERICANS EARNED HALF AS MUCH
BUT SAVED TWICE AS MUCH
AS THEY DO NOW.
OUR PERSONAL SAVINGS RATE
IS NOW 4%.
BY CONTRAST, THE JAPANESE
SAVE 16% OF THEIR WAGES.
STILL, FOR AMERICANS
THE MESSAGE TO SPEND
EVEN MORE IS INCESSANT.
THE CREDIT CARD OFFERS
KEEP COMING
WITH ENTICEMENTS RANGING
FROM TEMPORARY LOW RATES
TO FREQUENT FLYER MILES.
Woman:
AND HOW ARE YOU?
Simon:
EACH MONTH, CINDY ADAMS DEPOSITS
A CHECK AT CONSUMER CREDIT
COUNSELING TO PAY OFF DEBTS.
SHE'S LEARNED A HARD LESSON.
Cindy:
IT'S OKAY NOT TO HAVE THE NEWEST
THING, THE LATEST STYLE.
OUR HOME DOESN'T HAVE TO BE
TIP-TOP '90s CONDITION.
IT LETS US FOCUS ON THINGS THAT
ARE MORE IMPORTANT THAN STUFF.
Simon:
BUT CINDY AND KEATON
STILL FEEL CAUGHT
WHEN THEY THINK
ABOUT THEIR CHILDREN.
Keaton:
EVEN BRANDON AT THREE
IS NOW GOING TO PICK OUT STUFF:
"MOMMY, WHY CAN'T I HAVE IT?"
AND THAT'S JUST
THE WAY THINGS ARE.
Simon:
AND THAT TROUBLES GLENN STANTON
OF "FOCUS ON THE FAMILY."
Stanton:
THE PRESSURE THAT MATERIALISM
IS BRINGING TO BEAR
ON THE AMERICAN FAMILY TODAY
IS WOEFULLY UNDERESTIMATED
BUT IT IS CRITICALLY IMPORTANT.
FOCUS ON THE FAMILY,
THIS IS CATHY.
MAY I HELP YOU?
Simon:
FOUNDED BY DR. JAMES DOBSON
WHOSE RADIO PROGRAM
REACHES MILLIONS
FOCUS ON THE FAMILY
IS THE LARGEST CHRISTIAN
CONSERVATIVE ORGANIZATION
IN THE UNITED STATES.
THE POLITICAL IDEOLOGY HERE
IS FREE-MARKET CAPITALISM
THOUGH NOT WITHOUT RESERVATIONS.
Stanton:
THE MARKET IN A VERY REAL SENSE
IS HOSTILE TO THE FAMILY.
IT NEEDS TO EXPAND ITSELF.
IT NEEDS TO BRING
IN NEW CONSUMERS.
AND QUITE TRAGICALLY
IT BRINGS IN NEW CONSUMERS
ALMOST AT ANY PRICE.
DO WE GO OUT AFTER A SALE EVEN
PITTING CHILD AGAINST PARENT?
WE WOULD CONTEND
THAT THAT IS TOO FAR.
Simon:
STRONG FAMILIES
SPEND TIME TOGETHER.
BUT THAT'S LESS COMMON
IN OUR CONSUMER SOCIETY
EVEN WHEN PARENTS
ARE NOT WORKING.
Stanton:
MOM'S UPSTAIRS WATCHING
A MOVIE ON THE V.C.R.
DAD IS ON THE INTERNET.
THE KIDS ARE DOWNSTAIRS
PLAYING VIDEO GAMES.
EVERYBODY IS CONNECTED
TO SOMETHING OUTSIDE OF THE HOME
THOUGH THEY'RE PHYSICALLY
WITHIN THE HOME.
Choir:
I HAVE A DESTINY
I KNOW I SHALL FULFILL
IN THAT CITY ON A HILL
I HAVE A DESTINY...
Simon:
NEW LIFE CHURCH IS LESS THAN
A MILE FROM FOCUS ONF THE FAMILY.
SUNDAY SERVICES HERE
ATTRACT THOUSANDS
OF EVANGELICAL CHRISTIANS.
Minister:
THE BIBLE DOES NOT SAY
"BUY A NEW CADILLAC ANNUALLY."
IT SAYS, "KEEP YOUR LIVES
FREE FROM THE LOVE OF MONEY
AND BE CONTENT."
NOW, THE MESSAGE OF OUR DAY
IN OUR SOCIETY RIGHT NOW
IS ALWAYS, ALWAYS
BE DISCONTENT.
WE HAVE TREMENDOUS PROSPERITY
IN OUR COUNTRY
AND WE'VE NEVER PROBABLY
HAD SO MUCH DISCONTENT.
Simon:
PASTOR TED HAGGARD
LIKE HIS NEIGHBORS
AT FOCUS ON THE FAMILY
IS A FREE-ENTERPRISE
CONSERVATIVE
BUT HE, TOO, FEELS
THAT CONSUMERISM IS BECOMING
A POOR SUBSTITUTE FOR FAMILY.
THE MAJORITY OF PEOPLE ARE
RUSHING, RUSHING, RUSHING
TRYING TO GET A LITTLE BIT MORE,
AND... THAT'S GOT TO STOP.
OUR KIDS NEED IT.
OUR WIVES, HUSBANDS,
GRANDMA AND GRANDPA NEED IT.
Haggard:
YES!
IT IS NOT WORTH
HAVING ANOTHER THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET IN YOUR HOUSE
IF YOU LOSE THE RELATIONSHIP
WITH YOUR WIFE
OR IF YOUR CHILD TURNS 16 AND
YOU REALIZE YOU NEVER MET HIM.
HEY, NO, DON'T EAT THE...
NO, DON'T EAT THE WORD.
Simon:
WITH A LITTLE HELP,
PASTOR TED PREPARES A SERMON.
FOR HIM, BEING CONSERVATIVE
MEANS CONSERVING.
Haggard:
THE WHOLE IDEA OF US
USING A THING
AND THEN THROWING IT AWAY
AND GETTING ANOTHER ONE,
I THINK IS AFFECTING
ALL OF US AS PEOPLE.
WE START LOOKING
AT OTHER PEOPLE AND WE SAY
IF THEY DON'T GIVE US PLEASURE,
THEN THEY ARE DISPOSABLE.
I THINK IT CAN'T HELP
BUT CARRY OVER
INTO RELATIONSHIPS WITH PEOPLE,
THAT I'M DISSATISFIED WITH THIS;
THERE'S GOT TO BE
SOMEBODY BETTER OUT THERE.
Man:
I SEE THAT A LOT
IN MY PRACTICE
WHERE PEOPLE WILL COME IN
AND SAY
WELL, THEY MET SOMEONE AT WORK
OR, YOU KNOW, "OUR RELATIONSHIP
STARTED AT WORK
"AND THEN EVENTUALLY
WE DIVORCED OUR SPOUSES
AND WE GOT TOGETHER."
ONCE THE
WRAPPING WAS OFF
THEN IT WASN'T AS NEW
AND DIFFERENT AND WONDERFUL
AS IT WAS IN THE VERY BEGINNING
WHEN EVERYONE WAS DRESSED UP
AND POWDERED
AND LOOKED PERFECT.
SO THEY GO BACK TO THE COMPANY
AND FIND SOME OTHER TOY
TO PLAY WITH.
( people exchanging farewells )
Simon:
OUR COMMUNITY BONDS ALSO SUFFER.
THE SALVATION ARMY REPORTS
DIFFICULTY
FINDING VOLUNTEER BELL RINGERS.
PARTICIPATION IN CIVIC
ORGANIZATIONS AND ACTIVITIES
HAS BEEN DECLINING
OVER THE PAST 20 YEARS.
Stanton:
ALL OUR ATTENTION IS BEING
PULLED IN THE WRONG DIRECTION.
IN TRYING TO RUN THAT RAT RACE,
WE DON'T HAVE TIME
TO VOLUNTEER DOWN AT THE SOUP
KITCHEN, TO VOLUNTEER AT CHURCH
TO GO VISIT THE OLD FOLKS' HOME
TO PAY SOME TIME AND ATTENTION
TO PEOPLE WHO NEED US.
Simon:
AFFLUENZA AFFECTS PEOPLE
ACROSS ALL INCOME BARRIERS:
PEOPLE WHO HAVE A LOT
BUT WANT MORE
THEN FEEL THEMSELVES ALMOST
EMPTY INSIDE ONCE THEY GET MORE
AND PEOPLE WHO WANT
FOR LIFE'S BASICS
BUT STILL FEEL THEMSELVES
ALMOST TAUNTED
BY GLITTERING EMBELLISHMENTS.
AND IN RECENT YEARS
THE GAP BETWEEN THE TWO GROUPS
HAS BEEN GROWING.
IN FACT, THE GAP BETWEEN RICH
AND POOR AMERICANS IS NOW
THE WIDEST IN ANY
INDUSTRIAL NATION.
LOW-INCOME PEOPLE SEE IT
AS AN ISSUE OF INEQUITY:
HOW IS IT THAT I SEE
ALL THESE PEOPLE AROUND ME
GETTING WEALTHIER AND WEALTHIER,
DOING BETTER AND BETTER
GAINING MORE AND MORE
MATERIAL GOODS
AT A TIME WHEN I'M FALLING
FARTHER AND FARTHER BEHIND?
IF YOU LOOK CAREFULLY AT THE BIG
CONSUMER BOOM SINCE THE 1980s
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
YOU'LL FIND
IS THAT IT'S FAIRLY
HEAVILY CONCENTRATED
IN THE UPPER PART
OF THE MIDDLE CLASS AND ABOVE.
Simon:
FELICIA EDWARDS DIDN'T SHARE
IN THE BOOM.
SHE AND HER TWO SONS LIVE
IN A TINY APARTMENT
IN HARTFORD, CONNECTICUT.
( sighing heavily )
Simon:
LIKE MANY LOW-INCOME AMERICANS
FELICIA WORKS FULL TIME
AND THEN SOME
BUT STILL STRUGGLES
TO PROVIDE FOR HER CHILDREN.
Edwards:
I TRY TO TEACH THEM, YOU KNOW,
A DOLLAR IS HARD TO COME BY ...
WELL, TO ME IT IS.
CHRISTMAS ROLLS AROUND:
"CAN YOU BUY ME THIS?"
BUT WHATEVER I GIVE THEM,
THEY'RE FINE WITH IT.
THEY DON'T ASK ANOTHER QUESTION.
MONEY IS NOT ALL THAT IMPORTANT.
I MEAN, WE CAN'T BUY CERTAIN
THINGS, BUT STILL, WE'RE HAPPY.
WE'RE OKAY WITH IT.
Announcer:
It's "Rocko's
MODERN LIFE..."
Simon:
YET FELICIA KNOWS HER BOYS
FREQUENTLY FEEL DEPRIVED.
NOT LONG AGO,
ONE OF THEM BEGGED HER
FOR A PAIR
OF EXPENSIVE SNEAKERS.
Edwards:
THEY WERE $90.
I HAD TO EXPLAIN TO HIM FIRST
THAT I COULDN'T AFFORD THEM
SO HE WASN'T GOING TO GET THEM.
BUT ME AND HIS AUNT
CAME TO A DECISION
THAT WE WAS GOING TO GO HALF
ON THEM AND HE GOT THE SNEAKERS.
Simon:
IN OUR POOREST COMMUNITIES, THE
SENSE OF DEPRIVATION IS INTENSE.
Celente:
THERE WAS A FELLOW THAT I MET
AND HE WORKS WITH GANGS
AND I ASKED HIM, "WHAT'S
THE ONE THING THAT YOU SEE
THAT'S CAUSING A LOT
OF THESE PROBLEMS?"
WITHOUT SKIPPING A BEAT, HE
SAID, "GREED AND MATERIALISM."
HE SAID
"THESE KIDS, THEY DON'T FEEL
LIKE THEIR LIVES
"WOULD BE WORTH ANYTHING UNLESS
THEY HAD THE HOTTEST PRODUCT
THAT'S BEING SOLD
IN THE MARKETPLACE."
Simon:
SOON, CHILDREN THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD MAY FEEL THE SMAE WAY.
Man:
THE WHOLE CORPORATE SYSTEM
IN THE COURSE OF GLOBALIZATION
IS INCREASINGLY GEARED UP
TO BRING EVERY COUNTRY
INTO THE CONSUMER SOCIETY.
AND THERE'S
A VERY STRONG EMPHASIS
ON TRYING TO REACH CHILDREN
TO RESHAPE THEIR VALUES
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING
TO CONVINCE THEM THAT PROGRESS
IS DEFINED BY WHAT THEY CONSUME.
Simon:
EACH DAY, TELEVISION
EXPOSES MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD
TO THE CONSUMER DREAM
AND THEY ARE EAGER
TO BE INCLUDED.
DAVID KORTEN ONCE BELIEVED
THEY COULD, AND SHOULD.
HE'S WORKED IN AFRICA, ASIA
AND CENTRAL AMERICA
FOR THE HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL,
THE FORD FOUNDATION
AND THE AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
Korten:
MY CAREER WAS FOCUSED
ON TRAINING BUSINESS EXECUTIVES
TO CREATE THE EQUIVALENT OF
OUR HIGH-CONSUMPTION ECONOMIES
IN COUNTRIES
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
GRADUALLY I REALIZED
THAT THAT WASN'T WORKING
AND COULDN'T WORK.
MANY PEOPLE'S LIVES
WERE ACTUALLY WORSE OFF
THAT WE WERE SEEING
THE ENVIRONMENT TRASHED.
WE WERE SEEING THE BREAKDOWN OF
CULTURES AND THE SOCIAL FABRIC.
Simon:
ONE-FIFTH OF THE WORLD'S PEOPLE
LIVE IN ABJECT POVERTY
DYING SLOWLY OF HUNGER
AND DISEASE.
MILLIONS OF OTHERS
ALSO DESPERATELY NEED
MORE MATERIAL GOODS.
YET WERE THEY TO CONSUME
AS MUCH AS WE DO
THE RESULT COULD BE
AN ENVIRONMENTAL CRISIS.
THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NO WAY
THAT EVERYONE IN THE WORLD
CAN LIVE AT THAT STANDARD
OF AFFLUENCE
BECAUSE THE EARTH'S ECOSYSTEM
SIMPLY WILL NOT STAND IT.
IMAGINE IF EVERY CHINESE
HOUSEHOLD HAD TWO CARS.
Simon:
AS THIS CAR SHOW
IN BEIJING REVEALS
THEY'RE ALREADY ON THAT ROAD.
WESTERN PRODUCTS AND ADVERTISING
ARE POURING INTO
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
IT IS CREATING A GROUNDWORK
FOR A GLOBAL DISASTER.
Simon:
COMBINED WITH
A POPULATION EXPLOSION
NOT EXPECTED TO PEAK
FOR DECADES
THE CONSUMPTION BOOM THREATENS
TO DEVOUR THE WORLD'S RESERVES
OF OIL AND OTHER RESOURCES
WITHIN THE LIFETIME
OF OUR GRANDCHILDREN.
WE'VE SET THE EXAMPLE.
Film narrator:
THE AMERICAN CONSUMER.
EACH YEAR YOU CONSUME FANTASTIC
AMOUNTS OF FOOD, CLOTHING
HOUSING, AMUSEMENTS, APPLIANCES
AND SERVICES OF ALL KINDS...
Simon:
SINCE 1950, AMERICANS ALONE
HAVE USED MORE RESOURCES
THAN EVERYONE WHO EVER LIVED
BEFORE THEM.
EACH OF US USES UP TO 20 TONS
OF BASIC RAW MATERIALS ANNUALLY.
ONLY A SMALL FRACTION
GETS RECYCLED.
Korten:
WE ARE RUTHLESSLY CUTTING DOWN
THE WORLD'S FORESTS
DEGRADING OUR LANDS,
DESTROYING THE CLIMATIC SYSTEMS
ALL IN THE QUEST FOR MONEY.
Simon:
WE AMERICANS THROW AWAY
SEVEN MILLION CARS A YEAR
TWO MILLION PLASTIC BOTTLES
EVERY HOUR
ENOUGH ALUMINUM CANS ANNUALLY
TO MAKE 6,000 DC-10 AIRLINERS.
THE TOTAL YEARLY WASTE WOULD
FILL A CONVOY OF GARBAGE TRUCKS
LONG ENOUGH TO REACH
HALFWAY TO THE MOON.
OUR RIVERS AND OCEANS ARE
ALREADY CLOTTED WITH POLLUTION.
INCREASED EMISSIONS OF
CARBON DIOXIDE AND OTHER GASES
ACCELERATE GLOBAL WARMING.
Woman:
AFFLUENZA, THE DISEASE
OF CONSUMERISM
IS SPREADING AROUND THE WORLD
SO IT'S REALLY CRITICAL THAT
WE HERE IN NORTH AMERICA BEGIN
TO ALTER OUR PATTERNS
OF CONSUMPTION
AND SET A BETTER EXAMPLE
FOR THE REST OF THE WORLD
OF WHAT THE GOOD LIFE REALLY IS
OR NONE OF US ARE GOING TO HAVE
A GOOD LIFE.
Simon:
ACCORDING TO HISTORIAN
DAVID SHI
THE IDEA THAT THE GOOD LIFE IS
A SIMPLER, LESS ACQUISITIVE LIFE
RUNS DEEP IN OUR HERITAGE.
Shi:
SIMPLICITY IS AN ANCIENT,
EVEN A PRIMORDIAL IDEAL.
THE GREEKS REFERRED TO IT
AS THE "MIDDLE WAY"--
THAT MIDPOINT BETWEEN
LUXURY AND DEPRIVATION.
Simon:
"GIVE ME NEITHER POVERTY
NOR RICHES"
READS THE BOOK OF PROVERBS.
THE NEW TESTAMENT IS FILLED
WITH WARNINGS
ABOUT THE DANGERS OF WEALTH.
Shi:
SO WHEN THE PURITANS ARRIVED
IN THE NEW WORLD
ONE OF THEIR MAJOR PREMISES
WAS THEIR DESIRE
TO TRY TO CREATE
A CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH
THAT PRACTICED SIMPLE LIVING.
Simon:
"WASTE NOT, WANT NOT,"
WROTE BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
IN COLONIAL AMERICA
HABITS OF THRIFT PERSISTED
ALONGSIDE DESIRES FOR LUXURY.
EVEN 19th-CENTURY AMERICANS
STILL HAD MORE RESPECT FOR
THRIFT THAN FOR SPENDTHRIFTS
AND THE WORD "CONSUMPTION"
MEANT SOMETHING DIFFERENT THEN.
Rifkin:
IF YOU GO BACK TO SAMUEL
JOHNSON'S DICTIONARY
OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE,
"TO CONSUME" MEANT "TO EXHAUST
TO PILLAGE, TO LAY RENT,
TO DESTROY."
IN FACT, EVEN IN OUR
GRANDPARENTS' GENERATION
WHEN SOMEBODY HAD TUBERCULOSIS,
THEY CALLED IT "CONSUMPTION."
SO, UP UNTIL THIS CENTURY
TO BE A CONSUMER WAS
NOT TO BE A GOOD THING.
IT WAS CONSIDERED A BAD THING.
Simon:
ONE OF THE FIRST HARBINGERS
OF A CHANGE OF HEART
WAS THE DEPARTMENT STORE.
Woman:
URBAN DEPARTMENT STORES CAME IN
DURING THE 1880'S
BASICALLY TO CREATE THE SORT
OF PLACE WHERE PEOPLE WOULD GO
AND KIND OF LOSE THEMSELVES
AND SPEND THEIR MONEY.
Simon:
BY THE 1890s, WEALTHY AMERICANS
PROUDLY DISPLAYED
THE MATERIAL SIGNS
OF THEIR SUCCESS.
STILL, NOT EVERYONE
WAS IMPRESSED.
Shi:
IN THE LATE 19th CENTURY,
THER WAS ANOTHER MAJOR REVIVAL
OF AMERICAN INTEREST
IN SIMPLE LIVING.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT WAS ONE
OF THE FOREMOST PROPONENTS
OF A SIMPLER LIFE FOR AMERICANS
DURING THIS PERIOD.
ROOSEVELT WAS QUITE CANDID
IN SAYING
THAT FOR ALL OF HIS SUPPORT
FOR AMERICAN CAPITALISM
HE FEARED THAT IF IT WERE
ALLOWED TO DEVELOP UNLEASHED
IT WOULD EVENTUALLY CREATE
A CORRUPT CIVILIZATION.
Simon:
AS CONSUMER GOODS BEGAN TO ROLL
IN LARGE QUANTITIES
FROM AMERICAN ASSEMBLY LINES
LABOR AND RELIGIOUS
LEADERS URGED
THAT PRODUCTIVE
NEW TECHNOLOGIES BE USED
TO GIVE PEOPLE MORE FREE TIME
INSTEAD OF MORE POSSESSIONS.
BUT BUSINESS EXECUTIVES FEARED
A LAG IN CONSUMER DEMAND
MIGHT SEND THE WHOLE ECONOMY
CRASHING DOWN.
THEY CLAIMED THAT HUMAN WANTS
WERE INSATIABLE
AND LOOKED TO PSYCHOLOGY
TO STIMULATE SPENDING.
Announcer:
WHY FEEL LOW?
WHY BE A LITTLE GUY?
NOW YOU CAN BE JUST AS TALL
AS YOUR BEST GIRL.
SLIP INTO A PAIR
OF UPSY-DAISY SHOES.
THEY GIVE YOU A LIFT.
Simon:
AFTER THE GREAT DEPRESSION
AND WORLD WAR II
A LIFT WAS JUST WHAT
AMERICANS WANTED
AND BUSINESS WAS EAGER
TO PROVIDE IT--
WITH SOME HELP
FROM THE GOVERNMENT.
Film narrator:
NEW AUTOMOBILES STREAM
FROM THE FACTORIES.
FRESH BUYING POWER
FLOODS INTO ALL THE STORES
OF EVERY COMMUNITY.
PROSPERITY GREATER
THAN HISTORY HAS EVER KNOWN.
Simon:
LOW-INTEREST FEDERAL LOANS
AND SPENDING ON SUPERHIGHWAYS
FUELED THE SUBURBAN
HOUSING BOOM.
THE EXPANSION OF CREDIT MADE
LARGE CONSUMER PURCHASES EASIER
AND THE GOOD LIFE BECAME
THE GOODS LIFE.
Film narrator:
WE HAVE THE MONEY TO SPEND
AND WE WANT ALL
THE LOVELY-SMELLING SOAPS
LOTIONS AND GLAMOUR GOO
WE CAN GET WITH IT.
OUR EGOS ARE BEST NOURISHED
BY A WELL-PLACED INVESTMENT
IN REAL LUXURY GOODS--
WHAT YOU MIGHT CALL
DISCREETLY CONSPICUOUS WASTE.
Strasser:
THE IMMEDIATE POSTWAR PERIOD
DOES REPRESENT A HUGE CHANGE
IN THE KINDS OF ATTITUDES
THAT AMERICANS HAVE HAD
ABOUT CONSUMPTION.
Simon:
CONVENIENCE WAS THE NEW IDEAL,
DISPOSABLE THE MEANS--
USE IT ONCE AND THROW IT AWAY.
FAMILIES WERE ENCOURAGED
TO BUY A NEW CAR EVERY YEAR.
MARKETERS CALLED IT
"PLANNED OBSOLESCENCE."
PRODUCTS BECAME OBSOLETE
BECAUSE THEY WERE OUT OF STYLE
WHETHER THEY STILL
WORKED OR NOT.
Strasser:
THEY WERE SAYING THE CAR YOU HAD
LAST YEAR WON'T DO ANYMORE
BECAUSE IT DOESN'T LOOK RIGHT.
THERE'S NOW A NEW CAR
AND THAT'S WHAT WE WANT
TO BE DRIVING.
Simon:
CONSUMER SOCIETY WAS TRIUMPHANT,
BUT NOT WITHOUT CRITICS.
IN THE 1960s, A SMALL
BUT VOCAL COUNTERCULTURE
CALLED FOR A SIMPLER WAY
OF LIFE.
THEN IN 1974, A NATIONWIDE
OIL SHORTAGE CAUSED MANY PEOPLE
TO WONDER IF WE MIGHT
RUN OUT OF RESOURCES.
AND BY 1979
EVEN OUR PRESIDENT WAS
QUESTIONING THE AMERICAN DREAM.
TOO MANY OF US NOW TEND
TO WORSHIP SELF-INDULGENCE
AND CONSUMPTION.
PART OF JIMMY CARTER'S FAILURE
WAS HIS LACK OF RECOGNITION
OF HOW DEEPLY SEATED THE
HIGH, WIDE AND HANDSOME NOTION
OF ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT HAD BECOME
IN THE MODERN AMERICAN PSYCHE.
Simon:
SINCE CARTER LOST BY A LANDSLIDE
NO PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
HAS DARED CHALLENGE THE GOAL
OF INFINITE ECONOMIC GROWTH.
Woman:
'TIS THE GIFT TO BE SIMPLE,
'TIS THE GIFT TO BE FREE
'TIS THE GIFT TO COME DOWN
WHERE YOU OUGHT TO BE...
Simon:
BILL CLINTON AND AL GORE
APPRECIATED THE SENTIMENTS
CONTAINED IN THIS
OLD SHAKER HYMN.
BUT THEY PLEDGED
TO "GROW THE ECONOMY"
FASTER THAN
THEIR OPPONENTS COULD.
IN BOB DOLE AND
JACK KEMP'S OPINION
WE SHOULD AIM AT DOUBLING
THE AMERICAN ECONOMY
IN THE NEXT 15 YEARS.
Simon:
WHEN JACK KEMP OFFERED
THAT OPINION
VICE-PRESIDENT GORE
NEVER QUESTIONED
WHETHER IT WOULD REALLY BE
A GOOD IDEA
FOR AMERICANS TO CONSUME
TWICE AS MUCH AS THEY DO.
I KNOW YOU'LL SAY,
"THIS WON'T HURT," RIGHT?
WRONG.
OUCH, I'M CALLING MY LAWYER.
SHOTS STING,
BUT THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO HELP.
NOW, THERE IS NO SHOT FOR
AFFLUENZA, BUT HELP IS POSSIBLE
AND IF YOU STAY WITH US
WE'LL TELL YOU ABOUT IT
AFTER THIS MESSAGE.
Announcer:
THE AVERAGE NORTH AMERICAN
CONSUMES FIVE TIMES MORE
THAN A MEXICAN
TEN TIMES MORE
THAN A CHINESE PERSON
AND 30 TIMES MORE
THAN A PERSON FROM INDIA.
( pig belches )
WE ARE THE MOST VORACIOUS
CONSUMERS IN THE WORLD.
Simon:
IF YOU'VE NEVER SEEN
THIS "UN-COMMERIAL" BEFORE
IT'S NOT FOR LACK OF EFFORT
TO GET IT ON THE AIR.
ALL THE MAJOR NETWORKS
IN NORTH AMERICA HAVE REJECTED
JUST ABOUT ALL OF OUR
TELEVISION UN-COMMERCIALS.
Simon:
THAT HASN'T STOPPED
THESES ACTIVISTS
IN VANCOUVER, BRITISH COLUMBIA,
FROM PRODUCING THEM.
THEY ORGANIZE AN ANNUAL EVENT
CALLED "BUY NOTHING DAY"
AS A PROTEST
AGAINST CONSUMER CULTURE.
CONSUMERISM AND OVERCONSUMPTION
IS THE MOTHER
OF ALL OUR
ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS.
Simon:
KALLE LASN,
WHO WAS A MARKET RESEARCHER
UNTIL A SUDDEN CHANGE OF HEART
IS THE PUBLISHER OF A MAGAZINE
CALLED ADBUSTERS.
IT'S FILLED WITH SLICK PARODIES
OF REAL ADS.
BUT HIS REAL DREAM IS
TO GET UN-COMMERCIALS
ON COMMERCIAL TELEVISION.
Announcer:
TAKE BACK YOUR CHILDREN.
Lasn:
I THINK COMMERCIAL TV
IS THE COMMAND CENTER
OF OUR CONSUMER CULTURE.
Announcer:
WHY ARE NINE OUT OF TEN
WOMEN DISSATISFIED
WITH SOME ASPECT
OF THEIR OWN BODIES?
Simon:
MANY OF THE UN-COMMERCIALS
ARE DESIGNED
BY REFUGEES
FROM THE ADVERTISING INDUSTRY
CLANDESTINELY THEY COME
AND THEY HELP US
TO COME UP WITH
OUR ENVIRONMENTAL
AND OTHER KIND OF MESSAGES
WHICH ARE TRYING
TO USE TELEVISION
TO CHANGE THE WORLD
FOR THE BETTER
INVADING THE COMMAND CENTER
OF CONSUMERISM
WITH SOME VERY POWERFUL
ANTI-VIRUSES.
Announcer:
IT'S COMING...
( screeching )
THE END OF THE AGE
OF THE AUTOMOBILE.
Simon:
TELEVISION EXECUTIVES CONTINUE
TO REJECT THE ADS
EVEN THOUGH THE PRODUCERS ARE
WILLING TO PAY FOR THE AIR TIME.
LASN IS CHALLENGING
THE REJECTIONS IN COURT.
BUT EVEN WITHOUT TELEVISION
THESE ADBUSTERS FIND WAYS
TO GET THEIR MESSAGE OUT.
Woman:
HEY.
LET'S PUT ANOTHER ONE UP HERE.
Lasn:
THIS YEAR,
"BUY NOTHING DAY" HAS EXPLODED.
NOT ONLY ARE WE
IN EIGHT COUNTRIES
BUT OUR PHONE IS RINGING
OFF THE HOOK
AND IT'S BECOMING A TRULY
INTERNATIONAL CELEBRATION
OF FRUGALITY
AND LIVING LIGHTLY ON THE PLANET
AND OF VOLUNTARY SIMPLICITY.
( singing to tune
of "Jingle Bells" )
OH, GIVE WITH CARE,
BE AWARE
EQUALITY FOR ALL
OUR PLANET NEEDS HUMANITY,
NOT ANOTHER MALL, OH!
Simon:
IN SEATTLE, THE "BUY NOTHING
DAY" CELEBRATION INCLUDED MUSICE
BY A GROUP CALLED
"THE RAGING GRANNIES"
AND SIGNS URGING PASSERSBY
TO CUT UP THEIR CREDIT CARDS.
SEVERAL DID.
Woman:
WHOO! ALL RIGHT!
LOOK AT THAT CARD
GETTING CUT UP.
IT FEELS SO GOOD!
HERE YOU GO.
Simon:
THOUGH MOST SHOPPERS
IGNORED THE PROTEST
SOME FOUND IT THOUGHT-PROVOKING.
Teen:
THIS COUNTRY'S LUXURIOUS.
YOU DON'T
REALLY NEED
WE JUST
BUY STUFF
BECAUSE WE'RE IN A
COMMERCIAL SOCIETY.
I'LL PASS
SOME OF THESE OUT.
Lasn:
I FEEL THAT WE ARE
AT THE EARLY STAGES
OF A SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION
TO RECONSIDER THIS CONSUMPTION
BINGE THAT WE'VE BEEN ON
FOR ALMOST HALF A CENTURY NOW.
IT'S GOING TO KEEP ON
GATHERING MOMENTUM
AND SOMEWHERE ALONG THE LINE
EVEN THE ECONOMISTS
WILL COME ON BOARD.
Man:
CONSUMPTION REALLY IS AT THE
HEART OF WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT.
Simon:
TO IMPROVE OUR QUALITY OF LIFE
ECONOMISTS COULD CHANGE
THE WAY THEY MEASURE PROGRESS.
CRITICS SAY
THE CURRENT YARDSTICK--
GROWTH OF THE GROSS DOMESTIC
PRODUCT, OR G.D.P.--
IS SEVERELY FLAWED.
AS THE ECONOMY THAT AMERICANS
EXPERIENCES GETS WORSE
THE G.D.P. OFTEN PORTRAYS IT
AS BETTER.
Simon:
TAKE A FAMILY GOING
THROUGH DIVORCE.
Halstead:
FIRST THEY HAVE
COSTLY LEGAL BILLS
THEN THEY ESTABLISH
TWO HOUSEHOLDS
INSTEAD OF ONE HOUSEHOLD.
BUYING AND SPENDING
GOES UP CONSIDERABLY
BUT MEANWHILE, WHAT YOU HAVE
IS FAMILY BREAKDOWN.
Simon:
THE MORE WE PAY THE COSTS
OF AFFLUENZA
THE HEALTHIER
THE G.D.P. SAYS WE ARE.
Announcer:
EVERY TIME A FOREST FALLS,
THE G.N.P. GOES UP.
WITH EVERY OIL SPILL,
EVERY TIME A NEW CANCER
PATIENT IS DIAGNOSED
THE G.N.P. GOES UP.
Simon:
TED HALSTEAD AND HIS COLLEAGUES
HAVE DEVELOPED
A DIFFERENT MEASUREMENT
OF ECONOMIC SUCCESS--
THE G.P.I.,
OR GENUINE PROGRESS INDICATOR.
THE G.P.I. TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
24 ASPECTS OF OUR ECONOMIC LIVES
THAT THE G.D.P. IGNORES.
THEY START WITH, FOR EXAMPLE
THE VALUE OF HOUSEWORK
AND VOLUNTEERISM.
WE ADD FOR THAT.
WE SUBTRACT THINGS
LIKE THE COST OF CRIME
THE COST OF CAR ACCIDENTS,
THE COST OF FAMILY BREAKDOWN.
Simon:
WHILE G.D.P. CONTINUES TO RISE
THE G.P.I. HAS BEEN FALLING
SINCE 1973.
Halstead:
MEANING THAT BY THIS MEASURE
THE OVERALL COSTS
OF INCREASED ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
ARE STARTING
TO OUTWEIGH THE BENEFITS.
THERE'S NOW A GNAWING SENSE
THAT WE'RE PASSING ON A WORLD
OF SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL
AND ECONOMIC DEBT
TO OUR CHILDREN.
Simon:
JOE DOMINGUEZ WOULD AGREE
AND FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS,
THIS FORMER STOCK MARKET ANALYST
HAS BEEN DOING SOMETHING
ABOUT IT.
Dominguez:
WHEN I WAS ON WALL STREET
I SAW THAT PEOPLE
THAT HAD MORE MONEY
WERE NOT NECESSARILY
ANY HAPPIER.
THEY HAD JUST AS MANY PROBLEMS
AS THE FOLKS THAT LIVED
IN MY GHETTO NEIGHBORHOOD
WHERE I GREW UP.
SO IT BEGAN TO DAWN ON ME THAT
MONEY DIDN'T BUY HAPPINESS--
A VERY SIMPLE FINDING.
Simon:
SO JOE TRIED FRUGALITY.
HE FOUND HE ENJOYED LIFE MORE,
AND HE SAVED SO MUCH
HE WAS ABLE TO RETIRE EARLY
AND LIVE ON HIS INTEREST.
THEN HE TAUGHT OTHER PEOPLE
HOW TO CUT THEIR SPENDING.
VICKI ROBIN WAS ONE OF THEM.
Robin:
I FOUND THAT I NEEDED
TO LEARN HOW TO FIX THINGS
AND I BECAME FASCINATED
WITH LIVING LIFE DIRECTLY
AND DEVELOPING MY SKILLS
AND CAPACITIES AND INGENUITY
RATHER THAN JUST EARNING
MORE AND MORE MONEY
AND THROWING MONEY AT PROBLEMS.
Robin:
WE HAVE SO CONFUSED
STANDARD OF LIVING
WITH QUALITY OF LIFE...
Simon:
SOON VICKI, TOO,
WAS TEACHING WORKSHOPS
ABOUT USING MONEY WISELY.
IN TIME, THE WORKSHOPS LED TO
A POPULAR AUDIOCASSETTE COURSE
A CHARITABLE FOUNDATION
AND A BEST-SELLING BOOK CALLED
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE.
IT'S NOT ABOUT MAKING A KILLING
IT'S NOT ABOUT
HOW TO BUY REAL ESTATE
WITH NO MONEY DOWN
OR ANYTHING OF THAT SORT.
IT'S SIMPLY HOW TO HANDLE
YOUR EXISTING PAYCHECK
IN A MUCH MORE INTELLIGENT WAY
THAN THE WAY
THAT YOU'VE BEEN HANDLING IT.
Simon:
THAT MEANS CAREFULLY
REEXAMINING SPENDING HABITS
AND ASKING IF WHAT YOU BUY
IS REALLY WORTH THE EXTRA
WORKING HOURS IT WILL COST YOU.
IT'S THE STUFF
THAT OUR GRANDPARENTS KNEW.
YOU KNOW, HER GRANDMA
READ THE BOOK
BEFORE IT CAME OUT,
AND AFTER SHE READ IT
THE NEXT DAY
SHE CAME IN TO US AND SAID
"YOU'RE GOING
TO PUBLISH THIS?
"EVERYONE KNOWS THIS.
YOU'RE CRAZY."
Dominguez:
"AFTER ONLY THREE MONTHS,
WE ARE OUT OF DEBT.
WE HAVE BECOME MORE AT PEACE
WITH MONEY IN OUR LIFE."
THIS WAS IN PORTLAND.
Simon:
THOUSANDS OF READERS HAVE FOUND
THE BOOK TO BE A REVELATION
THEY FOLLOW
ITS NINE-STEP PROGRAM
AND FIND THEMSELVES
LOWERING THEIR EXPENSES
BY AN AVERAGE OF 25%.
Robin:
THE CORRESPONDENCE
THAT WE'VE GOTTEN INDICATES
THAT PEOPLE FROM EVERY INCOME
BRACKET ARE USING THIS PROGRAM.
OBVIOUSLY THE STEPS
WILL BE FAR MORE FRUITFUL
AND FAR MORE EFFECTIVE
FOR PEOPLE
IN THE LOWER-INCOME BRACKETS
SIMPLY BECAUSE THEY ARE THE ONES
WHO NEED TO KNOW
HOW TO STRETCH A BUCK.
Oprah Winfrey:
Oh, good, good point, Vicki
good point, got that.
Simon:
JOE DOMINGUEZ AND VICKI ROBIN
EACH LIVE COMFORTABLY
ON $7,000 A YEAR
WHILE DONATING ALL ROYALTIES
TO THEIR FOUNDATION.
OTHER AMERICANS ARE FINDING
THEIR OWN WAYS
TO LIVE BETTER WITH LESS.
ONE SOLUTION IS CO-HOUSING.
IN PORTLAND, OREGON, SEVERAL
FAMILIES HAVE COME TOGETHER
TO FORM THE ONGOING
CO-HOUSING COMMUNITY.
EACH FAMILY HAS ITS OWN HOME,
BUT THEY GROW FOOD TOGETHER
TAKE CARE OF EACH OTHER'S
CHILDREN, AND OFTEN SHARE MEALS.
THEY BUY GROCERIES IN BULK
AND LOWER THEIR EXPENSES
IN VARIOUS WAYS.
A RECENT STUDY FOUND
THAT CO-HOUSING FAMILIES
USE HALF THE ENERGY
AND PRODUCE ONLY HALF AS MUCH
WASTE AS TYPICAL HOUSEHOLDS.
THE COMMUNITY MEMBERS
HAVE VOLUNTARILY DECIDED
TO LIVE WITH FEWER POSSESSIONS.
ACCORDING TO A 1995 POLL,
86% OF THOSE AMERICANS
WHO HAVE VOLUNTARILY
CUT BACK THEIR CONSUMPTION
SAY THEY ARE HAPPIER
AS A RESULT.
INTEREST IN VOLUNTARY SIMPLICITY
NOW EXTENDS
EVEN TO THE CORPORATE WORLD.
MY NAME IS LITA AND MY LIFE
IS SIMPLY TOO COMPLICATED.
MY LIFE HAS BECOME SO CHAOTIC
I HAVE TROUBLE SORTING THINGS
OUT ON A DAILY BASIS
AND I REALLY THOUGHT
THIS MIGHT HELP.
Man:
IF YOU TAKE
THE SIMPLICITY COURSE
AND YOU TAKE IT SERIOUSLY
THEN YOU'LL HAVE
MORE THAN ENOUGH TIME
TO DO ANYTHING
THAT'S IMPORTANT TO YOU.
Simon:
WHEN DICK ROY OF THE NORTHWEST
EARTH INSTITUTE RAN A WORKSHOP
ON VOLUNTARY SIMPLICITY
AT NIKE'S PORTLAND HEADQUARTERS
A HUNDRED PEOPLE GAVE UP
THEIR LUNCH HOUR TO ATTEND.
NEARLY ALL JOINED
LONG-TERM STUDY GROUPS
HOPING TO CHANGE THEIR LIVES.
Man:
STUDY CIRCLES ARE BEGINNING TO
DEVELOP, NEWSLETTERS, MAGAZINES
INTERNET RESOURCES
ON THE COMPUTER AND SO ON
AND THAT IS NOW BEGINNING TO
CREATE A CULTURE OF SIMPLICITY
A CULTURE OF ECOLOGICAL LIVING.
Simon:
IF TREND-WATCHER GERALD CELENTE
IS RIGHT
IT'S A CULTURE
WITH GROWING APPEAL.
Celente:
IN OUR 17 YEARS
OF TREND TRACKING
NEVER BEFORE
HAVE WE SEEN AN ISSUE
THAT IS GAINING
SUCH GLOBAL ACCEPTANCE
AS VOLUNTARY SIMPLICITY.
IN 1996, WE ESTIMATE
ABOUT FIVE PERCENT
OF THE BABY-BOOM POPULATION
ARE PRACTICING A VERY STRONG
FORM OF VOLUNTARY SIMPLICITY.
BY THE YEAR 2000, WE ESTIMATE
THAT NUMBER IS GOING
TO BE UP TO 15%.
THEY'RE FINDING
A CURE FOR AFFLUENZA.
THEY GET RID OF THEIR STRESS
AND THEY SAY
"YOU KNOW, I LIKE LIVING
LIKE THIS A LOT BETTER.
HOW DID I LIVE
LIKE THAT BEFORE?"
( group singing )
Simon:
AND IT'S NOT JUST BOOMERS.
CELENTE SEES GROWING EVIDENCE
THAT YOUNG AMERICANS
ARE ALSO BEGINNING
TO REBEL AGAINST CONSUMERISM.
Celente:
TODAY'S TEENS AND PRE-TEENS
ARE GOING TO BE
TOMORROW'S REVOLUTIONARIES.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE
VERY ANTIMATERIALISTIC.
Simon:
THESE YOUNG ACTIVISTS
HOPE HE'S RIGHT.
"...YOU'RE STUPID, YOU'RE UGLY,
YOU'RE NOT POPULAR
UNLESS YOU BUY THIS PRODUCT"
AND IT SICKENS ME.
Simon:
WHEN YOUTH FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
FROM AROUND THE WORLD
MET RECENTLY
THEY TALKED ABOUT LIVING SIMPLY
AND ASSURING A FUTURE
FOR ALL GENERATIONS TO COME.
IT NEED NOT BE
A FUTURE OF DEPRIVATION.
STUDIES SUGGEST
THAT THE EARTH COULD SUSTAIN
A STANDARD OF LIVING
NEARLY AS COMFORTABLE AS OUR OWN
FOR EVERY HUMAN BEING ON EARTH
BUT THAT WOULD DEMAND SOCIAL
AS WELL AS PERSONAL CHANGE.
IT WOULD MEAN INVESTING
IN NONPOLLUTING,
ENERGY-EFFICIENT TECHNOLOGIES
PRODUCING GOODS THAT LAST LONGER
AND REQUIRE FEWER RESOURCES
CAREFULLY REUSING AND RECYCLING
REWARDING FRUGALITY
WHILE PENALIZING WASTE.
NARROWING THE GAP
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR
COMMITTING OURSELVES
TO ECONOMIC STABILITY
INSTEAD OF INFINITE EXPANSION.
YOUR MOUTH FEELS CLEAN,
YOUR THROAT REFRESHED
AS COOL AND AS CLEAN
AS A BREATH OF FRESH AIR.
Simon:
A GENERATION AGO
AMERICANS WATCHED ADS LIKE THIS
AND NOBODY LAUGHED.
ATTITUDES ABOUT SMOKING
HAVE CERTAINLY CHANGED.
TODAY, WITH GROWING EVIDENCE
THAT OVERCONSUMPTION
MAY ALSO BE HAZARDOUS
IT'S TIME, PERHAPS,
FOR ANOTHER ATTITUDE ADJUSTMENT.
AND WHAT MIGHT WE GAIN?
STRONGER FAMILIES
AND COMMUNITIES
SHORTER WORKING HOURS
AND LESS STRESS
A BETTER WAY OF LIFE.
THINK ABOUT IT.
THINK ABOUT ALL THE MONEY WE
SPEND TO FIGHT VARIOUS DISEASES
AND THEN REMEMBER AFFLUENZA
IS ONE MALADY WE CAN CURE
BY SPENDING LESS MONEY,
NOT MORE.
THANKS FOR BEING WITH US.
I'M SCOTT SIMON.